KEP-3243: Update the design to mutate the label selector based on matchLabelKeys at api-server instead of the scheduler handling it (#5033)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3243-respect-pod-topology-spread-after-rolling-upgrades/README.md

know the exact label key and value when defining the pod spec.

This KEP proposes a complementary field to LabelSelector named `MatchLabelKeys` in
`TopologySpreadConstraint` which represent a set of label keys only. 
kube-apiserver will use those keys to look up label values from the incoming pod 

> and those labels are merged to `LabelSelector`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and those key-value labels are ANDed with `LabelSelector` to identify the group of existing pods over 
which the spreading skew will be calculated.
```

> kube-scheduler will also look up the label values from the pod and check if those 
> labels are included in `LabelSelector`. If not, kube-scheduler will take those labels 
> and AND with `LabelSelector` to identify the group of existing pods over which the 
> spreading skew will be calculated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kube-scheduler will also handle it if the cluster-level default constraints have the one with `MatchLabelKeys`.
```

know the exact label key and value when defining the pod spec.

This KEP proposes a complementary field to LabelSelector named `MatchLabelKeys` in
`TopologySpreadConstraint` which represent a set of label keys only. 

> kube-apiserver will use those keys to look up label values from the incoming pod 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At a pod creation, kube-apiserver will use those keys to look up label values from the incoming pod 
```

> and those key-value labels are ANDed with `LabelSelector` to identify the group of existing pods over 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and those key-value labels will be merged with existing `LabelSelector` to identify the group of existing pods over 
```

which the spreading skew will be calculated.

> kube-scheduler will also handle it if the cluster-level default constraints have the one with `MatchLabelKeys`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that in case `MatchLabelKeys`is supported in the cluster-level default constraints (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/129198), kube-scheduler will also handle it separately.
```

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->
- 
  In addition to using `pod-template-hash` added by the Deployment controller, 
  users can also provide the customized key in  `MatchLabelKeys` to identify 
  which pods should be grouped. If so, the user needs to ensure that it is 
  correct and not duplicated with other unrelated workloads.
- 

>   `MatchLabelKeys` may be broken when the pod's label values corresponding to 
>   `MatchLabelKeys` are updated after the pod is created and unscheduled.
>   `LabelSelector` will not be updated even if the pod's label values are updated, 
>   because kube-apiserver merges key-value labels into `LabelSelector` and persists 
>   them in the pod object when the pod is created.
>   But, it is not general that the pod's labels are updated at that timing, and 
>   this means the pod will be scheduled without satisfying the `TopologySpreadConstraint`, 
>   not be unschedulable.
>   In the first place, it is deprecated to define `MatchLabelKeys` with label keys
>   whose value may change dynamically, and we should document it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### possible update to labels specified at `matchLabelKeys`

`MatchLabelKeys` is handled and merged into `LabelSelector` at _a pod's creation_.
It means this feature doesn't support the label's update even though users, of course, could update the label that is specified at `matchLabelKeys` after a pod's creation.
So, in such cases, the update of the label isn't reflected onto the merged `LabelSelector`,
even though users might expect it to be.
On the documentation, we'll declare it's not recommended using `matchLabelKeys` with labels that is frequently updated.

Also, we assume the risk is acceptably low because:
1. It's a fairly low probability to happen because pods are usually managed by another resource (e.g., deployment), and the update to pod template's labels on a deployment recreates pods, instead of directly updating the labels on existing pods. Also, even if users somehow use bare pods (which is not recommended in the first place), there's usually only a tiny moment between the pod creation and the pod getting scheduled, which makes this risk rarer to happen, unless many pods are often getting stuck being unschedulable for a long time in the cluster (which is not recommended) or the labels specified at `matchLabelKeys` are frequently updated (which we'll declare as not recommended).
2. Even if it happens, the topology spread on the pod is just ignored (since `labelSelector` no longer matches the pod itself) and the pod could still be schedulable. It's not that the unfortunate pods would be unschedulable forever.
```

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->
#### Possible misuse

In addition to using `pod-template-hash` added by the Deployment controller, 
users can also provide the customized key in  `MatchLabelKeys` to identify 
which pods should be grouped. If so, the user needs to ensure that it is 
correct and not duplicated with other unrelated workloads.

> #### the update to labels specified at `matchLabelKeys` isn't supported

Reviewer 3: Capitalize

`MatchLabelKeys` is handled and merged into `LabelSelector` at _a pod's creation_.
It means this feature doesn't support the label's update even though users, of course, 
could update the label that is specified at `matchLabelKeys` after a pod's creation.
So, in such cases, the update of the label isn't reflected onto the merged `LabelSelector`,
even though users might expect it to be.

> On the documentation, we'll declare it's not recommended using `matchLabelKeys` with labels that is frequently updated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the documentation, we'll declare it's not recommended using `matchLabelKeys` with labels that are frequently updated.
```

Also, we assume the risk is acceptably low because:
1. It's a fairly low probability to happen because pods are usually managed by another resource (e.g., deployment), 
   and the update to pod template's labels on a deployment recreates pods, instead of directly updating the labels on existing pods. 
   Also, even if users somehow use bare pods (which is not recommended in the first place), 
   there's usually only a tiny moment between the pod creation and the pod getting scheduled, which makes this risk further rarer to happen, 
   unless many pods are often getting stuck being unschedulable for a long time in the cluster (which is not recommended) 
   or the labels specified at `matchLabelKeys` are frequently updated (which we'll declare as not recommended).
2. Even if it happens, the topology spread on the pod is just ignored (since `labelSelector` no longer matches the pod itself) 

>    and the pod could still be schedulable. 

Reviewer 3: Is it true? Even if the `labelSelector` no longer matches the pod itself, the topology spreading is not ignored and could still make the pod unschedulable (ofc `selfMatchNum` will be 0). If it's what you mean, I'd rephrase it.

Reviewer: Yeah, sorry it's my suggestion and you're right, "ignored" was misleading and we should rephrase; `matchNum` - `minMatchNum` could still be bigger than `maxSkew` and node(s) in some domains could be unschedulable. 

> won't scheduler add new label ot the labelSelecor and make the pod completely unschedulable?

The scheduler adds, but the pod won't be 100% unschedulable. Rather, the label addition in this case makes the pod easier to get scheduled because `selfMatchNum` would be 0.

proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> A new optional field named `MatchLabelKeys` will be introduced to`TopologySpreadConstraint`.

Reviewer: We should keep this part.

```suggestion
A new optional field named `MatchLabelKeys` will be introduced to`TopologySpreadConstraint`.
Currently, when scheduling a pod, the `LabelSelector` defined in the pod is used 
to identify the group of pods over which spreading will be calculated. 
`MatchLabelKeys` adds another constraint to how this group of pods is identified
```

For example, when this sample Pod is created,

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample
  labels:
    app: sample
...
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector: {}
    matchLabelKeys: # ADDED
    - app
```

kube-apiserver modifies the `labelSelector` like the following:

```diff
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
+     matchExpressions:
+     - key: app
+       operator: In
+       values:
+       - sample
    matchLabelKeys:
    - app
```

In addition, kube-scheduler handles `matchLabelKeys` if the cluster-level default constraints is configured with `matchLabelKeys`.

Finally, the feature will be guarded by a new feature flag. If the feature is 
disabled, the field `matchLabelKeys` and corresponding `labelSelector` are preserved 
if it was already set in the persisted Pod object, otherwise new Pod with the field 
creation will be rejected by kube-apiserver.
Also kube-scheduler will ignore `matchLabelKeys` in the cluster-level default constraints configuration.

> ### [v1.33] design change and a safe upgrade path

Reviewer: Also, you have to mention it briefly at `Version Skew Strategy` section (you can point to this section not to explain the same thing twice).

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample
  labels:
    app: sample
...
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector: {}
    matchLabelKeys: # ADDED
    - app
```

kube-apiserver modifies the `labelSelector` like the following:

```diff
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
+     matchExpressions:
+     - key: app
+       operator: In
+       values:
+       - sample
    matchLabelKeys:
    - app
```

In addition, kube-scheduler handles `matchLabelKeys` if the cluster-level default constraints is configured with `matchLabelKeys`.

Finally, the feature will be guarded by a new feature flag. If the feature is 
disabled, the field `matchLabelKeys` and corresponding `labelSelector` are preserved 
if it was already set in the persisted Pod object, otherwise new Pod with the field 
creation will be rejected by kube-apiserver.
Also kube-scheduler will ignore `matchLabelKeys` in the cluster-level default constraints configuration.

### [v1.33] design change and a safe upgrade path

> Previously, only kube-scheduler handled `matchLabelKeys`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, kube-scheduler just internally handled `matchLabelKeys` before the calculation of scheduling results.
```

> But, we changed the design to make both kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler handle `matchLabelKeys` 
> for the reason described in [implement MatchLabelKeys in only either the scheduler plugin or kube-apiserver](#implement-matchlabelkeys-in-only-either-the-scheduler-plugin-or-kube-apiserver).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, we changed the implementation design to the current form to make the design align with PodAffinity's `matchLabelKeys`. (See the detailed discussion in [the alternative section](#implement-matchlabelkeys-in-only-either-the-scheduler-plugin-or-kube-apiserver))
```

> kube-apiserver will only merge key-value labels corresponding to `matchLabelKeys` into `labelSelector` 
> at pods creation, and it will not affect the existing pods.
> So if there are unscheduled pods with `matchLabelKeys` which are already created when upgrading cluster, 
> they may not be scheduled correctly after the upgrade.
> For a safe upgrade path from v1.32 to v1.33, kube-scheduler would handle not only `matchLabelKeys` 
> from the default constraints, but also all in-coming pods during v1.33. 
> We'll change kube-scheduler to only concern `matchLabelKeys` from the default constraints at v1.34 for efficiency, 
> assuming `matchLabelKeys` of all in-coming pods are handled by kube-apiserver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this implementation change could break `matchLabelKeys` of unscheduled pods created before the upgrade
because kube-apiserver only handles `matchLabelKeys` at pods creation, that is,
it doesn't handle `matchLabelKeys` at existing unscheduled pods.

So, for a safe upgrade path from v1.32 to v1.33, kube-scheduler would handle not only `matchLabelKeys` 
from the default constraints, but also all incoming pods during v1.33. 

We're going to change kube-scheduler to only concern `matchLabelKeys` from the default constraints at v1.34 for efficiency, 
assuming kube-apiserver handles `matchLabelKeys` of all incoming pods.
```

}
```

When a Pod is created, kube-apiserver will obtain the labels from the pod 
by the keys in `matchLabelKeys` and `key in (value)` is merged to `LabelSelector` 
of `TopologySpreadConstraint`.

For example, when this sample Pod is created,

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample
  labels:
    app: sample
...
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector: {}
    matchLabelKeys: # ADDED
    - app
```

kube-apiserver modifies the `labelSelector` like the following:

```diff
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
+     matchExpressions:
+     - key: app
+       operator: In
+       values:
+       - sample
    matchLabelKeys:
    - app
```

> kube-scheduler will also be aware of `matchLabelKeys` and gracefully handle the same labels.
> This is for the Cluster-level default constraints by 
> `matchLabelKeys: ["pod-template-hash"]`.([#129198](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/129198))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, kube-scheduler handles `matchLabelKeys` if the cluster-level default constraints is configured with `matchLabelKeys`. 
```

Finally, the feature will be guarded by a new feature flag. If the feature is 

> disabled, the field `matchLabelKeys` and corresponding`labelSelector` are preserved 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disabled, the field `matchLabelKeys` and corresponding `labelSelector` are preserved 
```

if it was already set in the persisted Pod object, otherwise new Pod with the field 

> creation will be rejected by kube-apiserver; moreover, kube-scheduler will ignore the 
> field and continue to behave as before.

Reviewer: kube-scheduler cannot determine which label selector(s) is generated by matchLabelKeys at kube-apiserver, and hence it couldn't ignore `matchLabelKeys` even after the downgrade. the cluster-level default constraints configuration is the exception though

```suggestion
creation will be rejected by kube-apiserver.
Also, kube-scheduler will ignore matchLabelKeys in the cluster-level default constraints configuration.
```

> 

Reviewer: So, I think here you can add another section `[v1.33] design change and a safe upgrade path`, and describe: 
- For a safe upgrade path from v1.32 to v1.33, kube-scheduler would handle not only `matchLabelKeys` from the default constraints, but all in-coming pods during v1.33. And, you also need to mention the reason described like [my comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5033#issuecomment-2597670863). 
- So, `matchLabelKeys` within in-coming pods are handled by both kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler at v1.33.
- We'll change kube-scheduler to only concern `matchLabelKeys` from the default constraints at v1.34 for efficiency, assuming `matchLabelKeys` of all in-coming pods are handled by kube-apiserver.

Author: Thanks! This is exactly what concerned me while revising the KEP draft.

}
```

When a Pod is created, kube-apiserver will obtain the labels from the pod 
by the keys in `matchLabelKeys` and the key-value labels are merged to `LabelSelector` 
of `TopologySpreadConstraint`.

For example, when this sample Pod is created,

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample
  labels:
    app: sample
...
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector: {}
    matchLabelKeys: # ADDED
    - app
```

kube-apiserver modifies the `labelSelector` like the following:

```diff
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
+     matchExpressions:
+     - key: app
+       operator: In
+       values:
+       - sample
    matchLabelKeys:
    - app
```

> In addition, kube-scheduler handles `matchLabelKeys` within the cluster-level default constraints 
> in the scheduler configuration in the future (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/129198).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, kube-scheduler will handle `matchLabelKeys` within the cluster-level default constraints 
in the scheduler configuration in the future (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/129198).
```

In the event of an upgrade, kube-apiserver will start to accept and store the field `MatchLabelKeys`.

In the event of a downgrade, kube-apiserver will reject pod creation with `matchLabelKeys` in `TopologySpreadConstraint`. 
But, regarding existing pods, we leave `matchLabelKeys` and generated `LabelSelector` even after downgraded.

> kube-scheduler will ignore `MatchLabelKeys` even if it was set.

Reviewer: ditto

```suggestion
kube-scheduler will ignore `MatchLabelKeys` if it was set in the cluster-level default constraints configuration.
```

- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

> 
> To ensure a safe upgrade path from v1.32 to v1.33, we plan to change the design between v1.33 and v1.34.
> For more details, please refer to the section [[v1.33] design change and a safe upgrade path](#v133-design-change-and-a-safe-upgrade-path).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

There's no version skew issue.

We changed the implementation design between v1.33 and v1.34, but we designed the change not to involve any version skew issue
as described at [[v1.33] design change and a safe upgrade path](#v133-design-change-and-a-safe-upgrade-path).
```

The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions by restarting 
kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler with feature-gate off.
One caveat is that pods that used the feature will continue to have the 
MatchLabelKeys field set and the corresponding LabelSelector even after 

> disabling the feature gate, however kube-scheduler will not take the MatchLabelKeys 
> field into account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disabling the feature gate.
```

-->

- [x] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details: 
>               This feature doesn't cause any logs, any events, any pod status updates.
>               But, users can know whether it's being evaluated by looking at `labelSelector` in `TopologySpreadConstraint`.
>               If key-value labels corresponding to `matchLabelKeys` are merged into `labelSelector` after Pods' creation, this feature is working correctly.

Reviewer: We can just do:

```suggestion
- Details: We can determine if this feature is being used by checking deployments that have only `MatchLabelKeys` set in `TopologySpreadConstraint`.
```

Author: I have a question about this suggestion.
While I understand that we should describe how users can verify whether the feature is functioning correctly in this section [like that](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/3633-matchlabelkeys-to-podaffinity#how-can-someone-using-this-feature-know-that-it-is-working-for-their-instance), 
it seems that you are describing how to check whether the feature is being used in deployment.
Is this appropriate?

Reviewer: yeah, sorry it should be `...checking "pods" that have...`

Author: Shouldn't we additionally describe "how to verify the feature is functioning correctly"?

Reviewer: So, how can you verify anything further? Your old explanation would be false when there are existing unscheduled pods with `matchLabelKeys` before the upgrade.

Author: > Your old explanation would be false when there are existing unscheduled pods with matchLabelKeys before the upgrade.

Sorry, I overlooked this point...

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->
Yes. there is an additional work:
kube-apiserver uses the keys in `matchLabelKeys` to look up label values from the pod, 
and change `LabelSelector` according to them. 

> kube-scheduler also looks up the label values from the pod and checks if those labels 
> are included in `LabelSelector`. If not, kube-scheduler will take those labels and AND 
> with `LabelSelector`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kube-scheduler also handles matchLabelKeys if the cluster-level default constraints has it.
```

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->
Yes. there is an additional work:
kube-apiserver uses the keys in `matchLabelKeys` to look up label values from the pod, 
and change `LabelSelector` according to them. 
kube-scheduler also handles matchLabelKeys if the cluster-level default constraints has it.

> The impact in the latency of pod creation request in kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The impact in the latency of pod creation request in kube-apiserver and the scheduling latency 
```

- Check the metric `schedule_attempts_total{result="error|unschedulable"}` to determine if the number 
  of attempts increased. If increased, You need to determine the cause of the failure by the event of 
  the pod. If it's caused by plugin `PodTopologySpread`, You can further analyze this problem by looking 
  at the kube-scheduler log.

> ## Implementation History

Reviewer: needs to be updated

 - 2022-03-17: Initial KEP
 - 2022-06-08: KEP merged
 - 2023-01-16: Graduate to Beta

>  - 2025-01-23: Change the design

Reviewer: It's vague, elaborate like

```suggestion
 - 2025-01-23: Change the implementation design to be aligned with PodAffinity's `matchLabelKeys` 
```

information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### use pod generateName
Use `pod.generateName` to distinguish new/old pods that belong to the 
revisions of the same workload in scheduler plugin. It's decided not to 
support because of the following reason: scheduler needs to ensure universal 
and scheduler plugin shouldn't have special treatment for any labels/fields.

> ### remove MatchLabelKeys implementation from the scheduler plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### implement MatchLabelKeys in only either the scheduler plugin or kube-apiserver
```

Then, briefly mention why we have to implement it in kube-apiserver too.

-->

### use pod generateName
Use `pod.generateName` to distinguish new/old pods that belong to the 
revisions of the same workload in scheduler plugin. It's decided not to 
support because of the following reason: scheduler needs to ensure universal 
and scheduler plugin shouldn't have special treatment for any labels/fields.

### implement MatchLabelKeys in only either the scheduler plugin or kube-apiserver
If the implementation for handling `MatchLabelKeys` exists only in scheduler plugin, merging the key-value labels 
corresponding to `MatchLabelKeys` into `LabelSelector` becomes impossible due to its immutability.
It may confuse users because this behavior is different from PodAffinity's `MatchLabelKeys`, 
On the other hand, if this implementation exists only in kube-apiserver, it prevents the achievement of the Cluster-level 
default constraints by `matchLabelKeys: ["pod-template-hash"]` ([#129198](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/129198)) 
because kube-apiserver can't be aware of the scheduler configuration.
In addition, each implementation is simple, and the risk of increased maintenance overhead is low.

> As a result, these ideas are rejected, and we have decided to implement `MatchLabelKeys` in both scheduler plugin and kube-apiserver.

Author: I think "the current design" is somewhat unclear in this context, so I've added some description to make it more specific.

information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### use pod generateName
Use `pod.generateName` to distinguish new/old pods that belong to the 
revisions of the same workload in scheduler plugin. It's decided not to 
support because of the following reason: scheduler needs to ensure universal 
and scheduler plugin shouldn't have special treatment for any labels/fields.

### implement MatchLabelKeys in only either the scheduler plugin or kube-apiserver
Technically, we can implement this feature within the PodTopologySpread plugin only;
merging the key-value labels corresponding to `MatchLabelKeys` into `LabelSelector` internally 
within the plugin before calculating the scheduling results.
But, it may confuse users because this behavior would be different from PodAffinity's `MatchLabelKeys`.

Also, we cannot implement this feature only within kube-apiserver because it'd make it

> impossible to handle `MatchLabelKeys` within the cluster-level default constraints in the scheduler configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
impossible to handle `MatchLabelKeys` within the cluster-level default constraints in the scheduler configuration in the future (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/129198).
```

> So we decided to go with the current design that implements this feature within both 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So we decided to go with the design that implements this feature within both 
```
